## lly first we try to know why we need vector stores

let we have made a system where if we see a movie then we have been recommended some movies in the basis of there features (features like movie lead hero , puliser, director etc) , it commpare it's vector to other and in the basis of there similarity it recommend movies;;; what proble is it will not work good in some situation , there are a chance that a moview which has same lead director, same pulistion same type of movie etc;; vector vice very similar but story of these two are totally diff, lly there may be two movies have some kind of story but totally diff director, publicer, type etc.. --> we can't except it's quality recommendation

## how we can improve this system --> compare there stories.

# plot of a movie means --> it's text story

--> for this you have to plot of each movies
--> now want a system which can compare plot of two movies and can give a similarity score.

## challenges you will face

c1 --> to generator embedding vectors for a plot (you will have 10M+ movies)
c2 --> storage (bz you will generate this embedding vecotor only one time )
and you don't store these vectors in a normal relational database so you need diff kind of database to store such embedding vectors

c3 --> semantic search (we have to find out semantic score for query movie with others (10M+)) --> time consumming --> we have to do something like so we will not need to compare it with all others --> **intellegent semantic search**

==> guess what we can solve these three challenages --> **vector stores**

################# What are vector stores###########
--> A **vector store** is a system designed to store and retrieve data represented as numerical vectors.

## Key Features

1. Storage -- Ensures that vectors and their associated metadata are retained, whether in-memory for quick lookups or on-disk for durability and large-scale use.

2. Similarity Search -Helps retrieve the vectors most similar to a query vector.

3. indexing -Provide a data structure or methods that enables fast similarity searches on high-dimensional vectors (eg. approximate nearest neighbor lookups). --> (only need to compare with coluster center (centroid))

4. CRUD operations- Manage the lifecycle of data -adding new vectors, reading them, updating existing entries, removing outdated vectors.

Use - cases:

1. semantic Search
2. RAG
3. Recommender Systems
4. Image/Multimedia search

## Vector Store Vs Vector Database:

- Vector Store:

- - Typically refers to a lightweight lib or service that focuses on storing vectors (embeddings) and performing similarity search

- - May not include many traditional database features like transactions, rich query languages, or role-based access control.

- - Ideal for prototyping, smaller-scale applications

- - Examples : FAISS (where you store vectors and can query them by similarity, by you handle persistence and scaling separately).

- Vector database
- - A full-fledged database system designed to store and query vectors.

- - Offers additional **database like** features:
    -> distributed architecture for horizontal scaling
    -> Durability and persistence (replication, backup/restore)
    -> metadata handling (schemas, filters)
    -> potential and ACID or near ACID guarantees
    -> Authentication/Authorization and more advanced security

- - Geared for produciton enviroments with significant scaling, large datasets
- eg. Milvus, Qdrant, Weaviate., pincone

* Vector database is effectively a vector store with extra database features (eg clustering,scaling, security, metadata filtering, and durability)


### now try to understand how vector store is implemented in langchain
## (Vector stores in LangChain)

* Supported Stores: Langchain integrates with multiple vectors stores (FAISS, Pinecone, Chroma, Qdrant, Weaviate, etc) , given you flexibility in scale, features, and deployment.

* Common interface : A uniform Vector Store API lets you swap out one backend (e.g.FAISS) for another (e.g Pincone) with minimal code changes.

* Metadata Handling: most vector stores in LangChain allows you to attach metadata (eg, timestamps, authors) to each document, enabling filter-based retrieval.


so most of the vector stores you will get in langchain ;; and having in langchain you will get a facility that those will same invoke or same calling methods ways.


* eg; through --> from_documents(...) or from_texts(...) --> you can creat vector store

* add_documents(...) or add_texts(..) --> through we can add new vector embedding 

* similarity_search(query, k=...) --> through we can do semantic search of a query

* and also langchain give you **metadata-based-filtering**

## so due to that if you want to change you vector_store like FAISS-> Pincone you can easly do it with making huge change in code

## now we try to see how you can use vector stores like how to make it how to put embedding vectors to in , how to do semantic search in it;; using **chroma db** as vector store


## (Chroma vector Store):

* Chroma is a lightweight, open-source vector database that is especially friendly for local development and small-to medium-scale production needs.




## now how it works --> tenant (basically users or team) --> multiple databases --> in each database -> multiple collections --> in each collection we have --> embedding vectors + metadata

## chroma has both feature vector store has well vector database (use sqlite3)






